---
title: I thought I Knew
category: Medicine
meta: 
layout: post
image: /assets/images/phills_and_chris.jpg
---

At this point in my career I have completed a four-year bachelor of science in kinesiology, four years of medical school and one year of post-grad training in family medicine. In one year I will be a licensed family doctor, able to practice family medicine on my own. Based on my education, I thought I knew about miscarriage. I thought my years of my training and countless patient interactions had taught me what I needed to know.

I have always had empathy for women who miscarry, even at 24 years old, a first year medical student far from family life, I knew that this was a loss and it hurt.
I thought I knew about miscarriage until it happened to me.
I started dating my best friend and soul mate when I was 26 and we knew very early on that we were in it for the long haul. We started talking about having children early. It was something we both wanted, sooner rather than later. It was something that weighed on my mind heavily. At 26, a second year medical student, I was privy to some medical knowledge that worried me. I knew the statistics. I knew that at 27 the miscarriage rate slowly starts to creep up. I knew that at 30 the rates of genetic anomalies climb, just a bit higher than when in ones twenties. I knew about declining fertility rates after 35. I knew too much.

But half way through a very expensive investment in my own education isn’t really a great time to have a child right? Many of my colleagues disagreed, in fact in my cohort of 84 we had three or four babies born to female medical students by the end of the degree and in the cohort behind me we had four babies in one year! These women have courage, often only allowed a handful of weeks off lest they be held back a year, they returned to lectures and clerkship with breast pumps and bottles and bags under their eyes, but they did it. Part of me has always been jealous of their strength, of their desire to truly have it all; to make no sacrifices; to not let career dictate life.
We got married shortly after medical school finished and right before residency training started. We knew we would start trying in the next year. We wanted to give ourselves a few months to settle in, get used to married life, get used to new jobs and new responsibilities, but I was 29 now. The infamous clock was ticking.

We found out that we were pregnant in January after only a few months of very haphazard trying. No ovulation detection kits required, much to my relief. I have lived in fear of infertility ever since a first year lecture in which a female physician started to cry whilst telling us ladies not to wait until the end of our training, like she had. She wanted to save us from the pain, her pain, of wondering whether a medical career put before family life was worth it.
We had our honeymoon in Hawaii coming up and I was nervous. I was nervous about feeling nauseated on the airplane. I was nervous about mosquitos and Zika (despite Zika not actually existing in Hawaii at the time). I was nervous about doing something wrong.

We reminded ourselves that we were healthy. I exercised daily, not too hard but hard enough. I have always had a meticulous diet, and became even more mindful of off limit foods, goodbye soft cheese and sashimi. I switched to decaf.
Hawaii was amazing. We slept in, we ran every day, we did yoga and we relaxed. But about half way through that holiday I felt something shift. A subtle change in my nausea, I was only 9 weeks – surely I am not so lucky that my morning sickness has already gone? And then one morning we went for a run and my breasts were decidedly
less painful then before. Like a good doctor, I of course googled this shift in symptoms and was reassured by the many online forum posters who had experienced the exact same thing and now had a healthy babe in their arms. Phew. It’s fine. Don’t be such a hypochondriac.

But it wasn’t fine. The day after we got back from our honeymoon we had our first ultrasound. I told my husband I could go on my own, that I would send him some pictures. That he didn’t need to miss more work for a first trimester ultrasound that wouldn’t look like much. He was reluctant but left for work, cell phone at the ready for our first look at the little raisin.
The change in my symptoms still lingered in the back of my mind and I wanted reassurance from this scan. Convince me that I worry too much. Convince me that my feeling is wrong. She started with a transabdominal view, she couldn't see much, a gestational sac but no heartbeat. Not to worry, it’s early; the little bean is just too small.

She switched to transvaginal. She tried a lot of different angles. She had my put my fists under my bum. She made excuses and laughed awkwardly. Then she left the room. I got changed and she didn’t come back. For about 10 minutes I waited. She hadn’t shown me a heartbeat. Is she coming back to show me? What is taking so long? When she returned it was with a very chipper smile and tone of voice, she handed me some photos and stated cheerily that my doctor would be in touch. Why didn’t she show me the heartbeat?
I left the hospital, photos in hand, unsure of what it all meant. I went to the grocery store and sat in the parking lot. I stared at the photos. Raisin was measuring a bit small... but my cycle can be irregular so my dates must just be off, right? I had five unanswered text messages from my husband. I didn’t want to tell him what I suspected. I wandered around the grocery store, thinking about what to make for dinner. The celebration dinner with sparkling apple juice that I had planned didn’t feel quite right anymore.
I agonized for a few hours and finally decided to text my doctor. I worried she would think of me as unprofessional for asking about my scan outside of office hours. Regular patients don’t have that privilege, why should I? But I did it anyway and she responded instantly, saying she was on holiday but she would watch for the report and let me know right away.

Just as we were getting ready for bed my phone rang. It was my doctor. She was very sorry, but the baby – the fetus, was measuring small and there was no cardiac activity. She was very, very sorry. She gave me options. To wait it out naturally. To repeat the scan in a week, just to be sure. To move things along with medication or a D&C.
Wait, what? No cardiac activity? How can that be? I did everything right. I don’t drink, I don’t smoke, I ate the right food. I’m married. I’m 29. We wanted this. I see women all the time in our outreach clinics who don’t do the right things, don’t plan for pregnancies and they end up with healthy babies – how is this fair?
My emotional response was about on par with the stages of grieving. Anger came quickly. The next morning I got up after very little sleep, I cried for a while and then I made myself go to the gym. I got on the treadmill enraged. I was furious with my body for failing me at the ONE thing it’s designed to do. I wanted to punish it. I wanted my body to hurt as much as my heart. I wanted to feel pain that made sense. Not this heart
hurt, grief heavy weight on my chest. I ran so hard I couldn’t breath. I ran so hard my sweat and my tears were indistinguishable. I ran until my legs burned and my lungs screamed and I couldn’t run anymore.
The days passed and we wavered between sadness and hope and anger and acceptance. I wondered if I made the right choice...medicine first, then family.
I waited for the repeat ultrasound, slowly coming to terms with the fact that this was real, but also secretly hoping the first one had been wrong.
A week after the first scan we went to the hospital again, to “confirm things”. When we arrived we were initially told that my husband would wait in the hall while the tech got started and then she would call him in. When I got settled on the bed she started the scan right away without my husband there. I stopped her and asked if he could come in now, wanting him by my side for the painful silence of a fetus with no cardiac activity.
My husband was never called into the room. Citing hospital policy, the heartbreaking news was confirmed to me in the deafening silence of an ultrasound suite while my husband sat in the hall outside; both of us alone and keenly aware of the heartbeat coming from the suite next door. We didn’t need the report to tell us that we could finally let go of the last bit of hope we were clinging to. It was time to move on.
What I learned about miscarriage is that it hurts more than you can understand if it hasn’t happened to you. In nine short weeks you begin to imagine a whole world for yourself, your partner and this tiny human you created. You give the baby nicknames and start to refer to it by name in conversation. “I wonder if Raisin will be a boy or girl?” “Raisin is giving me heart burn”. This little ball of cells becomes part of you and your future and your hopes and your dreams so quickly that when you lose it, you feel like a piece of your heart just walked out on you too.

What I learned about miscarriages is that it makes you afraid. It makes you fear for the next pregnancy. Will this happen again? Is something wrong with me? Did I cause this?
What I learned about miscarriage is that pregnancy involves two patients – a mother and a father who both deserve to be included in all aspects of pre-natal care. If fathers are permitted in the delivery suite, surely they can be present during an obstetric ultrasound.
What I learned from my miscarriage is that nothing we say to our patients can make the pain any better. No amount of reassuring words or statistics will alleviate the mixed joy/fear that comes with subsequent pregnancies.
What I learned from my miscarriage is that no matter how early the pregnancy, it is terribly painful to carry a baby in your heart instead of your arms. At a time when few people in a woman’s’ life even know about her pregnancy, loss can be a terribly big secret to keep.

**Dr Phillippa Houghton**
**UBC Family Medicine Resident**
