---
title: But I Never Get Sick…
category: Medicine
meta: Why you really need to think of the flu shot.
layout: post
image: /assets/images/flu-shots.jpg
---

Flu season is fast approaching. If you are in North America you have probably
noticed advertisements for the flu shot at your local pharmacy and medical clinic. But that doesn’t apply to you right? You never get sick and in fact, the last time you had the flu shot you actually GOT THE FLU. So it’s a waste of time, and possibly just a big ploy by the pharmaceutical companies to make money right?

Wrong.

According to the National Advisory Committee on Immunization,
influenza is a respiratory infection caused mostly by the influenza A and B virus. It tends to hit in the winter months and causes symptoms such as high fever, sore throat, chills, cough and muscle aches. Most healthy adults will recover from influenza in about two weeks but some people are at increased risk of severe complications such as pneumonia requiring hospitalization.
Those at greatest risk are the very young (under 5 years of age), the immuno-
compromised (pregnant women, those with diabetes, cancer or heart/lung problems) and people over 65 years of age. Ok great, so none of those high risk people are you, so free pass – no needle required right?

Wrong.

The flu shot is recommended for all individuals, with a particular focus
on the high-risk groups I mentioned above. The reason being is that if you, an otherwise healthy twenty-something, contract influenza, you will likely recover in 1-2 weeks with minimal downtime. You may still go to work, to the movies and out with friends. You may cough and sneeze and touch doorknobs and money and stair railings in the process. Do you see where I’m going with this? While you may catch the flu and recover quite well, you’ll be unknowingly spreading the disease to people around you.

The flu shot isn’t about protecting you twenty-somethings, it’s about protecting everyone else in the high risk category. If we can prevent you from catching the virus and spreading it around town faster then yesterdays gossip, we can protect the babies, grandparents and diabetic people who share your community. We can prevent hospitalization and in some cases even death secondary to the influenza virus. This concept is known as herd immunity. Herd immunity is a form of passive protection from a disease that happens when a large percentage of the group is immune to it. The more people in a community that are immune, the smaller the probability that those who are not immune will come into contact with the disease. Quite simple. So get your millennial butt out the door and to your nearest pharmacy or medical community. The rest of us will thank you for it later.