---
title: How Do I Get Toned?
category: Fitness
meta: What do I do?
layout: post
image: /assets/images/howDoIGetToned.jpg
---

If you Google most commonly asked fitness questions, “how to get toned” is in the top ten.
So, I thought I would address that one today.
First of all, I am going to come right out there and say I hate the word “toned”.
What does that even mean? There’s no true definition in fitness or science to support the use of the word “toned”.
Now, what I understand it to mean, is having defined muscles in a feminine kind of way.
Not too bulky. Definitely not huge.
This question is usually asked by females who want to look like a bikini model but not a figure competitor.
They want to look fit but not manly.


The only way to create arms with definition is to build muscle, and the only way to do that is to lift weights.
Decently heavy weights.
The term hypertrophy means to grow, and in order to grow our muscles we need to challenge them at the appropriate repetition range.
It is well accepted that the hypertrophy rep range lies somewhere in the 8-12 region, three to five sets with a weight around 75% of your maximum.
So, what that means in practice is that by the time you reach that 11 or 12 rep, you better shaking and struggling to bust it out.
If you reach 12 and you could do another 10 more, your weight is not heavy enough.

But won’t I get bulky?
AGH. No, ladies come on.
Those women you see in figure competitions, the ones who look a little on the masculine side, they’ve been lifting EXCEPTIONALLY heavy weights for a very long time. They have been stuffing themselves with excess calories, supplements and often testosterone, growth hormone or anabolic steroids to force their bodies to gain more muscle. They’re not hitting the gym three-five times a week for a 60 minute lifting session.

If you, an average gym goer, lift heavy weights, you’ll get stronger.
If you lift heavy weights and eat right you’ll get stronger and leaner.
You’re biceps may pop and you might start to notice that much sought after quad tear.
But you won’t get bulky. Please, that takes a lifetime of commitment and some fairly scientific tweaking of hormones.

When I was in medical school I trained for a bikini competition.
I did this by following a traditional three-phased program - strength, hypertrophy, cut.
I maxed out my deadlift, squat, bench press and pulls-ups. I hit the gym every single day, and towards the end of my training, twice a day.
I consumed more protein than I thought possible.
When I looked in the mirror on comp day, I didn’t see an ounce of bulk. I saw strong legs, lean abs, cut biceps.
I saw hard work.
I saw strength.

Don’t ever let anyone convince you that the way to a “toned” body is by light weight lifting lest you risk looking manly.
In a female body, with normal female hormones, it’s not possible. So get out there and lift something.